Is Pirlo Pulling His Weight for NYCFC?In the pantheon of big names to have played in Major League Soccer over the two decades of its existence, Andrea Pirlo ranks highly. The Italian midfielder has won it all - the World Cup, the Champions League and countless Serie A titles - and now finds himself aiming for North American success with New York City FC.   If the league’s newest franchise was looking for someone to sell as many shirts as possible they certainly found the right man in Pirlo. The franchise might only be just over a year old, but the Italian veteran has become one of the club’s most commanding figures in that time.    Indeed, Patrick Vieira has attempted to build his team around Pirlo, using the former AC Milan and Juventus man as the dynamo to revolve his midfield around. In attack it’s David Villa who leads the line, but Vieira wanted the Italian to define the very identity of his side over the 2016 season. It hasn’t really worked out that way, though.   Pirlo disappointed in his first season in MLS, gaining a WhoScored rating of 6.73, but much of that was put down to New York City FC’s growing pains as a whole, with Jason Kreis sacked following the failure to secure a play-off place. This year, expectations have justifiable weighed heavier on the Italian, but once again he has failed to deliver.   That doesn’t mean that Pirlo hasn’t been without his highlights in MLS. Every so often he picks a trademark pass that few players in the world game, never mind just North America, could. He has made three assists in 13 appearances so far this season.   However, that performance against Orlando at Yankee Stadium demonstrated the best and worst of the Italian and what he offers  . While he remains one of football’s great passers of the ball, he has been at fault for a number of defensive lapses over the course of the season. It has got to the point where Vieira has to account for Pirlo’s defensive deficiencies in the centre of the pitch.   He just doesn’t offer the protection New York City FC need from their midfield anchor. He averages 2.8 tackles per game, which is fewer than midfield teammate Federico Bravo (3.2), suggesting that the Italian is allowing too may opposition moves to pass through him, putting pressure on those behind the Italian.    His interception average makes for even less impressive reading, with the Italian making just 1.5 interventions per game. Pirlo simply doesn’t have the mobility any longer to play in that way, with opposition attackers frequently passing the veteran with ease, having been dribbled past 1.2 times per game this season. He is the passing pivot at the centre of the New York City FC team, but at what cost does that role come?   Even in terms of assists and creativity, it could be argued that Pirlo isn’t quite living up to his billing. Compare his statistics with that of Sacha Kljestan’s at the New York Red Bulls, with the US international playing a similar role for Jesse Marsch’s side across the city in Harrison. He has eight assists this season, making an average of 3.7 key passes per game, leaving Pirlo in his shade.   Diego Valeri and Lee Nguyen are also proving more effective as playmakers in MLS this season, although it should be pointed out that both players occupy positions closer to goal than Pirlo. Nonetheless, Pirlo isn’t doing enough to justify his selection upon factoring in his defensive weakness and how that has crippled NYCFC at times.   As an anchor at the heart of the midfield,   is trailing well behind the likes of Will Trapp and Osvaldo Alonso in MLS, with those two players averaging over 70 passes per game. By comparison, Pirlo is averaging 56.8 passes per game, his lowest return in the last six seasons. The same can be said of Michael Bradley at Toronto FC, who boasts a defensive side to his play in the way the Italian veteran at NYCFC doesn’t.   What’s more, pressing questions have been asked regarding Pirlo’s true commitment to the cause in MLS. A clip of him leaning against the goalpost while allowing an opposition side to score from a corner kick made an impact on social media last season and it would appear he isn’t much more energetic this season. Is it just his languid style or is Pirlo’s laziness a genuine issue for Vieira and New York City FC?   The appeal of Pirlo was strong when the midfielder was available on the market a year ago, but with Frank Lampard already something of a lost cause at New York City FC, Vieira has a decision to make on the long-term future of his central unit. Pirlo might not be a part of it.