Key Man Chiriches Crucial for Dark Horse Romania in FranceTottenham fans will feel they are all too familiar with the exploits of centre-back Vlad Chiriches. While he arrived in 2013 with a a weight of expectation as one of the seven players signed following the departure of Gareth Bale, the defender ultimately struggled with the physical rigours and the speed of the Premier League. Technically sound, it was a lack of concentration on and off the ball that saw his time in England cut short after just two years.   Sold to Napoli last summer, early signs suggested he would struggle under Maurizio Sarri. “I only saw him play once six months ago and I know very little about him,” the Partenopei boss said in the wake of the centre-back’s arrival last July. Indeed, Chiriches’ starting opportunities were limited, particularly in the league. Sarri instead called on Kalidou K2 Koulibaly and Raul Albiol to solidify the defence, which evidently worked as Napoli secured second place, conceding just 32 goals in Serie A last season; only Juventus (20) shipped fewer.    was more often than not forced to watch from the sidelines, making just eight league appearances in his debut campaign in Naples. Rather, Sarri called on the 26-year-old to help Napoli to Europa League glory, only to be knocked out by Villarreal at the last-32 stage. He still gained a respectable WhoScored rating of 7.17 in Europe’s second club competition, with his pass success rate in the Europa League (92.4%) the best of all Napoli players to make three or more starts.   With a style of play of ‘possession football’, Chiriches clearly adhered to Sarri’s demands, but was outshone by Koulibaly and Albiol. Yet, despite a lack of regular first team action for Napoli last season, Chiriches will lead Romania out at Euro 2016 this summer. The former Spurs defender is one of the youngest captains at this summer’s European Championship, yet has mustered ample experience for the national team.   Indeed, Chiriches started all 10 of Romania’s European Championship qualifiers and was part of a defence that conceded just two goals, the fewest in qualifying, with Anghel Iordanescus side one of four to remain unbeaten throughout the campaign. Alongside Dragos Grigore, Romania are an extremely tough side to break down and you get the feeling that defence will be their strongest asset as they aim to progress from Group A. This is reinforced in that they netted just 11 goals in the 10 games to reach Euro 2016. Evidently, attack is far from the Tricolorii’s best quality.   Their defensive resilience, therefore, is crucial, particularly with daunting meetings with France and Switzerland looming. The meeting with the former kicks Euro 2016 off in a week’s time and   are far from bereft of attacking talent. The latter, meanwhile, despite underwhelming in recent months, are still able to call on Xherdan Shaqiri, Haris Seferovic and the pacey Breel Embolo in the final third, with the teenage sensation likely to thrive with new Arsenal signing Granit Xhaka pulling the strings in midfield.   On paper, the hosts and the Swiss are favourites to progress, but Romania aren’t at Euro 2016 to merely make up the numbers. “If we (Romania) stay together we are capable of big things - trust me,” Chiriches recently told  . There is an air of confidence about this Romania side and for good reason given their successful qualifying campaign. While their group was far from the most difficult to navigate, success breeds confidence and vice versa, which they will take into Euro 2016.   He’s aided, of course, by the faith placed in him by head coach Iordanescu. Coming into the tournament, Chiriches is the second youngest defender in the squad and the sixth youngest player in the side. “Chiriches’ role is fundamental,” the Romania boss said of the centre-back. It further highlights just how highly thought of he remains on the international stage.   While his club form has been indifferent in recent years, the Napoli defender’s influence for his country is undeniably crucial. Given that Romania’s average age at   will be 28.3, Chiriches is evidently Iordanescu’s key component as the national side guns for unlikely international glory. Provided they can remain compact and hit opponents on the break, there is an always opportunity for a shock on the cards akin to Greece’s feat at Euro 2004, who defended their way to the European Championship.    Romania, to some, are a dark horse in Euro 2016, and with four of the six third placed teams progressing to the next round of the tournament, Romania will fancy their chances of at least making it to the last-16 stage. Indeed, if Chiriches - like his defensive teammates - can replicate his qualifying form and remain steadfast, there is every possibility the centre-back can make his first international tournament a successful one. He will need to do so in order to earn a move and gain more playing time at club level.